Typography - making text beutiful and easy to read

serif vs sans-serif : serif - tails at end of words(good for long text and conveys trustworthiness)
		      sans-serif - Serif but no tails(modern look,clean and simple)

Rules : 
1. Use good and popular typefaces and play it safe.
Ex : Sans Serif popular type faces --> Inter,Open sans,Roboto,monotserrat,Work sans,Lato.
     Serif --> Merriweather,Aleo,playfair display,cormorant,cardo,lora.

2. Its okay to use just one typeface per page ! if you wan tmore limit to 2.

3. Choose right type face according to your website personality.
	Steps: Choose b/w serif / sans-serif --> experiment b/w its typefaces.

4. When choosing font-sizes , limit choices ! Use a "type scale" tool or other pre-defines range.
	Normal Text --> 16 to 32 px ;
	Long Text (like blog post)--> 20px or more
	Headlines --> 50px + and bold ( 600+)
Note : dont go below 400 font weight as it is regular one.

5. Create good reading experience.
	a. Use less than 75 characters per line.
	b. For normal text , use line height between 1.5 and 2 . for big text go below 1.5.
	c. decrease letter spacing in headlines.
	d. Experiment with all caps for short titles. ( make small , bold and decrease letter-spacing)
	e. Usually, Don't justify text.
	f. Don't center long text blocks , small blocks are fine.

6. Choose the right color:
	a. make main color match your website's personality(colors convey meaning)

red -- Attention,power,passion,exitement.
orange -- less aggressive,happiness,cheerfulness,creativity.
yellow -- joy,brightness,intelligence.
greens -- harmony,nature,growth and health.
blue -- peace , trustworthiness,professionalism.
purple -- wealth,wisdom,magic.
pink -- romance,care,affection.
brown -- nature,durability,comfort.
black -- power,elegance,minimalism but also grief and sorrow.

b. Use good color tone! Don't use random tone or css named colors.(use toolbox like jonas.io , talwing ,flat ui)

c. You need atleast two types of colors in your color pallete : main and grey colour.

d. With more experience ,you can add more collors : accent colors (Use a tool).

e. For diversity, create lighter and darker "versions" (tints and shades).

When and how to use colors :

f. use main color to draw attention to the most imp. elements onn page (say buy now button).

g. Use colors to add interesting accents or make entire components or sections stand out.

h. You can try to use your color strategically in images and illustrations.

i. On dark coloured bg, use tint(light shade) of bg for text.

j. Text not to be completely black. light it up if it looks heavy and uninvited.

k. Don't make text too tight! Use a too to check contrast b/w text and bg colors. 
Use "Coolors" to check contrast ratio(at least) --> 4.5 : 1 for normal text & 3:1 for large text(18px +).

7. Use good images:

a. diff types of imgs : product photoes,story telling photoes, illustrations, patterns.

b. Use imgs to support ur msg and story. So only use relevent imgs!

c. Prefre original imgs.If not possible , use original looking stock imgs(not generic ones!)
Toolbox --> Unsplash(Best!) , pexels ,drawkit ,undraw.

d. Try to use real people to trigger user's emotion.

e. if necessary,crop imgs to fit ur msg.

f. Experiment combining photos, illustrations and patterns.

Handling text on images:

g. Darker or brithen image (completely or partially,using a gradient).

h. Or position text into neutral image area.

i. Or put text in a box.

technical details:

j. to account for high res screens , make img dimensions 2 times as big as their displayed size.

k. coompress imgs for lower file size and better performance.(tool --> squoosh).

l. When using mul. imgs side by side , make sure they have same dimensions.

8.Use good icons:

a. Use good icon pack (free - phosphor icons , ionicons , icons8)

b. use only one icon pack , never mix two.

c. use svg (vector based - scale idefinately) icons or icon fonts . Don't use bitmap img formats (jpg or png) {as when scaled , becomes blur}.

d. Adjust to website personality! Roundness ,wt and filled/outlined depend on typography.

when to use icons :

e. to provide visual assistance to text.

f. for product feature blocks.(with icons user can understand without even reading text)

g. associated with actions and label them (like - Home , Notification) {unless no space or icon is 100% clear}

h. as bullet points(like tick-cross).

Use icons well:

i. To keep icons neutral, use same color as text.To draw more attention , use different colors.

j. Don't confuse ur users ; icons need to make sense and fit the text or action!

k. dont make icons larger than what they were designed for . If needed,enclose in a shape.

9. Use shadows well : add depth

a. You dont have to use shadows! only use them if it makes sense for website personality(less-serious/elegent , more-playful/fun).

b. Use shadows in small doses: don't add shadows to every element.

c. go light on shadows , dont make them too dark. 

use shadows in right situation:

d. use small shadows for smaller elts that should stand out(draw attention)

e. use med-sized shadows for larger areas that should stand out a bit more.(like - cart).

f. use large-sized shadows for elts that should really float above the interface.

g. experiment changing shadowes on click(small) or hover(med).

h. bonus : experiment with glowes (colored shadows) {makes it look like shining). 

10. Use Border radius well :

a. it icrease the playfulness and fun of the design , to make it less serious.

b. Type faces have a certain roundness : make sure that border radiys matches the roundness.

c. use border radius on buttons ,images , icons , stamdout sections and other elts.

11. why whitespace :
 
a. right amt of whitespace makes design look modern ,clean and polished.

b. communicates how diff pieces of info related to one another.

c. implies invisible relationship b/w the elts of layout.

where to use whitespace :

a. use tons b/w sections.

b. b/w grp of elts.

c. b/w elts.

d. inside grp of elts try to use whitesoace instead of lines.

how much white space:

e. the more some elts(or grps of elts) belong together, the closer they should be! {Law of proximity}.

f. Start with lot of whitespace , maybe too much! then remove whitespace from there.

g. match other design choices. if u have big text or icons , u need more whitespace.

h. try hard rule, such as multiples of 16 px for all spacing {2,4,8,12,16,24,32,48,64,80,96,128}.

12. Visual heirarchy {establishing which elts are most imp ones , drawing attention to these imp elts , defining a path for users to guide them through page}
--> aciheved by position , size , colors , spacing , borders and shadows.

Fundamentals :

a. position imp elts closer to top of page , where they get more attention { attention goes from top to bottom }.

b. use imgs mindfully as they draw lot of attention (larger imgs gets more attention).

c. whitespce creates seprations, so use it strategically to emphasize elts.

For text elts :

d. use fontsize , weight, color , and whitespace to convey importance.(lighten the color for less imp)

e. what text to emphasize --> title , sub-titles ,links, buttons, data pts,icons.{also de-emphasize less imp}.

B/w Components (grps of elts or big data)

f. Emphasize an imp using bg color , shadow or border(or multiple).

g. try emphasizing A over  B by de-emphasizing B.

h. what components to emphasize --> testinomials, call to actions sections(like sign up),highlight sections,preview cards , forms , pricing tables , imp rows /cols in tables, etc.

UX ( user experience ):
--> visual presentation of product(how it looks) ; layout, personality, typography, colors, icons, etc.

UI And UX Design :

UI-->Graphical interface, ui design makes an interface beautiful.
UX-->Experience with interface, ux design is what makes an interface useful and functional.

ux designing principle  : Goals
> a websiite exist for a reason: a user has goal for visiting it, and a business has goal for creating it.
> goal of ux is fullfill both requirements.

UX rules for usability:

a. dont design complicated layouts.Dont re invent the wheel. Use patterns that user know.

b. make ur call to action the most prominent elt and make text descriptive.

c. use blue text and underlined text only for links.

d. animations should have a purpose and be fast: b/w 200 and 500 ms.

e. in forms ,align labels and fields in a single vertical line to make form easier to scan.

f. offer user good feedback for all actions: form errors , form success,etc.

g. place action buttons where they will create effect (law of locality).

UX rules for website content :

a. use discriptive , keyword-focused headline on main page. Dont be vagye or fancy!(should conveys what the website  is all abt).

b. only include revelent info ,efficiently! Cut out fluff and make the content 100% clear.

c. use simple words! avoid technical jargon and "smart-sounding" words. 

d. for long text , break it with sub-headings,imgs , block quotes,bullet pts, etc.


Website Personalities :

1. Serious/elegant
2. Minimalist/simple
3. plain/neutral
4. bold/confident
5. calm/peaceful
6. startup/upbeat
7. playful/fun


How to choose-->

decide the vibe --> choose one of the personalities accordingly --> apply personality traits to each design ingredient,i.e,
(typography, colors, imgs, icons, shadows, border-radius, layout)


